Good afternoon, everyone.
My name is Matthew Formica.
I'm the developer tools software
evangelist in developer relations,
and we've got some great technology
to talk to you about this afternoon.
So this is the Objective-C 2.0 Overview.
And as you heard Ted Goldstein say
in the Developer Tools State of
the Union yesterday,
Objective-C as a language is really
Apple's secret weapon that helps us be
far more productive than other companies
with much greater numbers of engineers.
So how does Objective-C let
us be this productive?
Well, it's due to a few reasons.
First of all, some of the great features
that are in Objective-C.
It's got a powerful dynamic runtime
and introspection capabilities
that allow us to write really
flexible and reusable code.
And Objective-C allows you to do
that in your applications as well.
Secondly, we've got great OS integration
with the language.
We've got frameworks that
know of and take advantage
of the Objective-C language,
the Cocoa frameworks,
and they work really well
together in a seamless manner.
And finally, Objective-C as a language
is really easy to learn.
It's not the complicated spaghetti code
you might get in some other languages.
C++.
and others.
Being in developer relations,
I've seen many of you cross the
hurdle to learn Objective-C over
the past several years,
and usually there's some
hesitation at first,
but then within a few days you've been
up and running using the language.
There may be a few of you here
at the conference who are not
yet using this amazing language.
I encourage you to learn
it here at the conference.
You can be fluent,
you can be using it within a few days
and really fluent within a few weeks.
We've got this additional layer,
Objective-C++,
that allows you to actually intermingle
Objective-C code with C++ code so
that if you do have cross-platform C++
code that you need to continue you can
continue to use that with Objective-C.
So Objective-C has these great benefits.
They allow Apple and you as
developers to be amazingly productive.
Objective-C is a great language.
But some of the original architects
of the language at Apple got
together and were thinking,
"What could we do to make
the language even better?
What would it mean to
improve on Objective-C?"
And as they thought about this,
they came up with some goals
that an improved version 2 of
Objective-C would need to meet.
The Objective-C goals would be fourfold.
First of all,
they wanted to build in first-class
support for Cocoa idioms.
Over the years,
we've seen that there are common
patterns to how you use Cocoa,
and we wanted to make a fast path
through the language to using
those common patterns in Cocoa.
Secondly,
we wanted to make the SQL perform
even better than the original.
And that's because the uses of
Objective-C are far greater now and
applications are far larger than they
were when Objective-C was first invented.
Thirdly, the science of language design
has continued to advance,
and there are other features that
have been invented that we wanted
to incorporate into the language.
And we wanted to do all of this in
a way that didn't break existing
Cocoa Objective-C applications
on the platform.
So what would it mean to make
Objective-C achieve those goals?
It would mean revving the language.
And that's exactly what we've done.
And so this session is about
the improved Objective-C,
Objective-C 2.0,
that hits those design goals.
And so what you're going to learn
about in this session is all the new
language features that we've added,
including several that have not yet been
talked about in the states of the union.
We're going to tell you a
little bit about some aspects
of the rewritten runtime.
And actually, since in 64-bit computing,
we aren't limited by the
same ABI requirements that
32-bit applications have,
we don't need to maintain
binary compatibility.
There are actually some features
that we could only implement
for 64-bit applications.
So 64-bit apps get to go even further.
And to explain these features and more,
I'd like to introduce Blaine Garst,
one of the architects of Objective-C2.
Let's see, is this mic working yet?
Is this mic working?
Okay, good.
Let's talk about garbage
collection first of all.
[Transcript missing]
It's an opt-in system.
You get it by compiling with
this magic little compiler flag.
There's a checkbox in Xcode.
I'll show you that in
the talk following this.
All Apple frameworks work in both modes.
So if there's a framework on the system,
it will be GC-capable by lepidogia.
We didn't quite get to all of them in
the seed that you have in your hands,
but all the major kits are converted,
and we've run lots of code against them,
including Xcode internally.
And as you saw on a TED stage,
we even went and talked to the
Omni guys and got several of their
apps up and running on it too.
So the basic scheme in order
for our frameworks internally
to run in both modes is that
they still have to have all that
retain-release code and logic in there.
It's just that the runtime
just ignores those messages.
It's like, you know, in two instructions,
we detect that it's one of
these things and just bail out.
And so there's no code,
no retain-release code is ever executed.
The major new way to think about things,
though,
is that instead of a dialog method,
you know, dialog methods sometimes
really do something important,
like let go of a resource.
And so in those cases,
you do need an equivalent.
You need what we call a finalized method.
And so if, and only if,
you need to get rid of resources,
you need to write a finalized method,
and we provide support for that.
What's fun is we've added some more
tool support to make that happen.
You may have seen X-Ray showing
garbage collections going on
when a text edit was converted.
It turns out that text edit needed no
changes whatsoever to run in a GC mode.
It didn't do anything really
magic in its DLX methods,
and so you just compile it with the
GC flag and it comes up and runs.
So very simple applications require
very little work to get up and run.
So as I said earlier,
internally we've been using
Xcode to kind of push our
changes through everything else.
We have some of the small apps
and there's other apps internally.
We have, I think, a fairly small API for
garbage collection.
It is obviously about reducing your code,
and so we don't have to force
a lot of new ideas on you,
but we do have a few things.
We have a garbage collector object,
which you can query about what's going
on and to do a few critical operations.
We've updated map tables and
hash tables from sort of opaque
structures into first-class
objects that deal with objects,
including this new concept
called a weak object,
meaning there still are cases where you
do want to have sort of a non-retained
reference to something else.
In Java, there's something
called a weak reference,
and when it's an object itself,
and you can put a pointer into it.
And when the referenced
object is not retained,
it's not a weak reference.
And when the referenced object goes away,
the weak reference gets zeroed.
Well, we put that into the language.
So we actually have a weak attribute that
you can put on your instance variables
and on globals such that when the
collector collects the referenced object,
your instance variable gets zeroed out.
It's very cool.
We have had for some time now
the finalize and drain methods.
We started this work several years ago,
and in fact, Tiger Reflex has a lot of
almost GC-ready code in it.
There's a lot of stuff.
We have an allocate collectible
routine to actually let you allocate
collectible memory and do things with it.
And all this and more in depth is going
to be told to you in this room in the
session immediately following this one.
It's too much to go into in this talk,
and so that's just sort of
a teaser for the next talk,
really.
So let's go on to the next topic.
Fast enumeration.
We had, for fast enumeration,
several girls.
We wanted to make enumeration fast.
I will show you some code
examples later as to...
[Transcript missing]
Let's talk about enumerating arrays.
Now, if you're a real object
programmer and it's time to
walk through an array object,
you might start out by just getting the
object enumerator and running through it.
It's pretty nice.
But it has some expense.
You have to allocate
an enumerator object.
And it turns out for safety reasons,
over the 15 years since we put this in,
it turns out that the enumerator
objects actually had to make a copy of
all the elements inside the collection
in order to vend them to you safely.
And making a copy of all those
elements is actually expensive.
So once the copy is established, though,
in the middle of the loop,
the inner part of the loop,
it boils down to one
method call per item.
title.
[Transcript missing]
Wouldn't it be nice if we could
simply write this instead?
And so the cost with this,
with language support,
is two hidden method calls to
go through the entire array.
You get a benefit that we put
a safety check in the middle.
We check to see whether or not that
collection has been changed while
you're in the middle of the enumeration.
Because that happens, it turns out.
Even though our documentation
says that it shouldn't,
you shouldn't trust on that,
it turns out that there
is a fair amount of code.
And I could cite the radars,
but we don't really
want to get into that.
So there's a hidden mutation
safety check in the middle of that.
And the other benefit, of course,
is that it's concise.
You don't have to repeat
that NSString twice.
You don't have to have
an unsigned int counter.
I always type int.
I mean, you know, it just reads better.
So I like that.
It's a better way to program.
Let's show you a little bit of
the performance going on here.
So the first line is our
new fast enumeration scheme.
This is for arrays of size, you know,
factor of 10 on up to 100,000.
So it turns out that at size 10,
you know, there might be a little bit of
a setup cost still apparent,
but by size 100, it's just linear with
the number of objects.
Remember, there's no object copying
going on with this one.
We're just going in,
getting the raw pointer to the memory,
and ripping through it.
The super-extreme code, you know,
that big bunch of boilerplate,
comes in pretty fast.
You know,
it's pretty competitive on a speed level.
But remember,
it is doing a copy of all the
elements most of the time.
Anything above 100 is a copy.
So we've sort of done the impossible.
We've squared the circle.
We have gotten the speed
without paying for the memory.
It's a very nice win.
We really like that.
Looking at the standard objected index
shows you what some people have found if
they've done some performance analysis.
Objected index is
actually pretty expensive.
The fun thing here is
that for large objects,
that very first one,
the enumerator example, is actually,
you know, comes in ahead.
But you know,
arrays are not often 1,000 in size.
So in the low sizes, you know, 0 to 100,
the enumerator example is just way, way,
way expensive.
So I talked about how we
did a good job for arrays.
This is a feature for all collections,
however, and another common collection
we have are dictionaries.
And so this is the standard code
that you have to write to go through
the elements of a dictionary.
And this is the code you're
going to write to go through the
elements of a dictionary now.
Again, a little bit more concise.
And again, remember that in all cases
these objects were copied.
Well, as of Leopard,
those objects aren't going
to be copied anymore.
So enumeration has gotten
a little bit faster,
and you're going to be -- if
you compile and target Leopard,
you may get some enumeration mutation
warnings coming out of these guys if
you've been cheating and changing your
collections while enumerating them.
Let's take a look at the graph of
the performance for dictionaries.
Again, the first one is fast enumeration.
We don't quite get to rip along
as fast as we do with arrays.
There's an extra null check.
There's essentially one method
call per element in this case.
And the existing enumerator is, you know,
we're a little bit faster
than the existing enumerator,
although in this case it
was still copying memory.
So again,
we're faster without using the memory.
And for small objects,
for small dictionaries,
the cost is just exorbitant.
Clearly, you want to use the new language
mechanism whenever you can to get
through your small object dictionaries.
What you've seen so far syntactically is
you put the type declarator right in the
middle of the parenthesized expression,
but you don't have to.
If you already have an iterator variable
that you want to use for other purposes,
you can go ahead and use that also.
Here's examples of both forms,
showing that as a for statement,
so the regular control flow
operations work as you would expect.
You can return from the middle,
you can break out and have the last value
assigned in there available for you.
Inside Cocoa, of course, the collections,
mutable and immutable variations
on the collections adopt this.
The new map table and hash
table objects also adopt this,
and as I said before,
all NS enumerators have
an implementation of this.
If you've coded your own,
you can override this method and
make it even faster if you know how.
These are just some of the objects.
I didn't go through the header
files and name them all,
but it's there where you want it.
So let me talk just a little
bit about the implementation.
It's fun.
So when the compiler sees
that language statement,
it synthesizes this on-stack
sort of state buffer with some
pointers in the middle of it.
It calls into a batch enumerator
to grab a bunch at a time.
And once it gets a
batch of them at a time,
it loops through them doing a mutation
check before it hands off to your code.
The collections implement this method,
and the method basically says, you know,
you get this state
field coming in at zero.
That means it's the start of one.
It resets it to be some internal state,
sets a guard pointer
for the mutation check,
and sets the pointer to the real objects.
And it returns how
many of them there are.
It's pretty simple.
You don't really want to
have to remember this,
but for reference,
that's what the structure looks like,
and that's the method that
the collections implement.
A simple implementation of
that method for an array with
just a list of objects is,
as I said,
you set the state to be 1 to say,
you know, next time you're in,
we're done.
You set the mutation pointer,
in this case, to yourself,
because in this example,
you're an immutable array.
Set the element pointer
and return the count.
So when the compiler
sees this in your code,
what it generates
is this.
It's a lot of code.
You don't want to have to write that.
You want the compiler
to write it for you.
That's what compilers are good for.
So if you wanted to use
that method by yourself,
you've got to do this in your code.
I don't know why you necessarily would.
And with that,
let's shift gears a little bit.
We've made a couple other
changes to the language.
One of them is to protocols.
Protocols came into the language
about 15 years ago and from one
person's viewpoint here at Apple,
they were missing something.
Ali Ozer has been ringing
our necks for years saying,
"I can't use them to describe
delegate methods." He calls those
informal protocols and he's right.
You can't use protocols.
Protocols say,
"Here's a set of methods you
must define." They're a nice
grouping function for that.
So what we've done is
has added a capability to protocols now.
So what Cocoa does today
to describe these informal
protocols-- this is a real example.
The layout manager
delegate has two methods.
It's the first one I could
find that only had two.
These are either/or.
Use one or both, you know.
And he declares them as a category
on NSObject just so that you have
some type information available
so you know what the types are
to your arguments and stuff.
Yeah, it works.
What would be better is
if you had a protocol,
if you could declare that concept
in a protocol and say optional
about the methods that follow it.
And so we put that in as a--
Ali has not had time to actually rewrite
all of Cocoa or all the headers yet,
but he will because we did this already.
Well, anyway, he will.
He has every intention of making
this happen by Leopard GM.
So in the future,
what you're going to see in the header
files is that in the layout manager,
you're going to get to type
the delegate being set,
and then in your code,
you get to say that you're going to
be adopting one of those methods.
And so that makes your code easier,
the design of your code
more easily expressed.
This is going to be adopting this thing,
and so when you set it,
the compiler is going to be very
happy with you when you do this.
Hmm.
For completeness,
there is also an @ required.
And that lets you, you know,
mix and match and design your
protocol layout the way you want.
And with that,
I'd like to hand the podium
over to Patrick Beard,
who's going to talk about a feature
you've seen several times already,
and that's ""properties.""
And that lets you, you know,
mix and match and design your
protocol layout the way you want.
And with that,
I'd like to hand the podium
over to Patrick Beard,
who's going to talk about a feature
you've seen several times already,
and that's ""properties.""
Properties,
what we really wanted to do with them was
to streamline support for encapsulation.
So with properties in your code,
you get the convenience and
sort of the similarity to
variables and instance variables,
but you get the encapsulation of
methods and all the power that
goes along with key value coding.
You know and love if you're
an AppKit diehard user.
One of the other things about properties
is they're very easy to add to your code.
They're very easy to adopt
because if you've already written
KVC compliant accessor methods,
you just declare a property and
the property will be implemented
in terms of those accessor methods.
And here's the real killer feature.
We support automatic generation of
accessor methods when you use properties.
We call these synthesized properties.
And they're going to make a lot of the
tedious code you may have to write,
some of the code you saw
earlier in the GC section,
just go away.
And here's the real killer feature.
We support automatic generation of
accessor methods when you use properties.
We call these synthesized properties.
And they're going to make a lot of the
tedious code you may have to write,
some of the code you saw
earlier in the GC section,
just go away.
And here's the real killer feature.
We support automatic generation of
accessor methods when you use properties.
We call these synthesized properties.
And they're going to make a lot of the
tedious code you may have to write,
some of the code you saw
earlier in the GC section,
just go away.
And here's the real killer feature.
We support automatic generation of
accessor methods when you use properties.
We call these synthesized properties.
And they're going to make a lot of the
tedious code you may have to write,
some of the code you saw
earlier in the GC section,
just go away.
Categories, and, gotta love 'em,
Protocols.
The great thing about properties
on protocols is they let you
model both behavior and state.
You can define a generic queue,
for example, with generic nodes that
would have next fields,
next properties, and write some really
interesting generic code.
All of these classes, all of these forms,
also have metadata generated for
them that's available at runtime.
So you can walk up to a class
that purports to implement a
particular protocol or a category,
all the metadata for categories
is merged into classes,
and walk up to a class and ask it,
"What are all the things you support
as properties?" And reflect on them,
print them out, do interesting things.
So here's synthesized properties.
First thing to note is something
called a property attribute.
Property attributes are directives
to the compiler to say how to
implement the property or how the
property's behavior should work.
So in this case,
the Ivar property attribute
tells the compiler to
synthesize the implementation.
It declares an instance variable,
underscore name in this case.
It declares and implements
the accessor methods.
So you write this.
[Transcript missing]
So here's how you add a
property to existing code.
I'm just showing this in
context of an AppKit class.
It already defines the title
and set title accessor methods.
So simply declaring @property in a
string title gives the compiler enough
information to let you start accessing
that property using dot notation.
You're done.
You can even simplify it further and
remove the accessors if you like.
The compiler is, in essence,
declaring those accessors
when it sees this property.
So I was talking,
I introduced property attributes
by way of example with Ivar.
We actually classify our
attributes into two forms,
those which are interesting
to clients and those which are
interesting to implementers,
implementation details.
And we try to keep the client property
attributes in the interface file,
in the header file, and try to move the
implementation attributes where
no one else has to see them.
So the first three,
the three client attributes
I want to tell you about,
one is the read-only attribute
that allows you to declare
this property can only be read,
cannot be set.
The compiler, if you say x.y equals zero,
it will refuse.
We also defined three attributes that
tell how to manage an object reference.
One is by copy.
This is appropriate for a key
value coding attribute or by value,
such as a string or an NSNumber.
What happens is when you
synthesize such a property,
we will call the NS copying
protocol methods "copy with zone"
on the object when it's assigned
into your object automatically.
The complement of byCopy is byRef,
which is default, and that just means
use a retained pointer.
And the third example is Weak.
In the garbage collection system,
Weak will give you a zeroing
weak reference in your property.
In non-garbage collection mode,
you'll just get a non-retained pointer.
So implementation attributes.
Technically the IVAR attribute is what
we call an implementation attribute,
although for architectural reasons it
has to go in your header file today.
That's because we need to know all of the
instance variables that are in your class
so that subclasses can infer how large
your class is to do their IVAR layout.
In 64-bit, we'll actually be able to
move the IVAR attribute
outside of the header file.
It's sort of an implementation detail.
Clients of your property don't really
care that it's synthesized or not.
They just want to use it.
The Ivar= form definitely belongs
inside the @Implementation.
And so what I haven't shown
you is that you can declare,
re-declare your property the same
way you declare methods in your
@Implementation section of your class.
When you use Ivar=,
your Italian compiler synthesizes
the accessor methods in terms of an
already existing instance variable.
So it doesn't have to match
a particular naming pattern.
You specify the name.
The getter=setter= form,
a good example of why you might want
to use it is if you have a case of
pre-existing accessor methods that don't
match the compiler's default pattern,
which is property name
and set property name.
Those are the default
names for a property.
A good example is Boolean properties.
Boolean properties,
many of them begin with "is," although
their setter is "set." So set name,
is name.
Auto display is a good
example of that property.
property in Ennis Window.
Again, this is an implementation detail.
No one's interested in seeing these
sort of ugly-- what I would consider
ugly directives in the header file.
Finally, the really exciting and,
I think,
innovative thing about properties,
beyond what I've already said,
is something we call dynamic properties.
Dynamic properties are properties that
don't have an implementation that the
compiler can find at compile time.
They are resolved at runtime.
So the next section I'm going to go into
more details about dynamic properties.
Dynamic properties allow a class,
for example, to provide services to its
subclasses in the way of
The properties that it didn't
know about at compile time.
By using the property metadata,
we can get the name of the property and
we can get the type of the property.
And all, in fact,
all of the property attributes
that I've told you about are
all expressed in the metadata.
So you can look at them,
see if it's read-only or how it should
be managed in terms of references.
So a good example for
this would be Core Data.
Core Data provides the NSManagedObject
to do persistent storage of objects.
And here's the canonical way,
classical way of implementing
a subclass of NSManagedObject.
Let's say you have an entity
that defines a property called
"name" that's string-valued.
In this case,
The generic way of getting
at your properties with core
data is to use value for key.
Value for key is an untyped
way to get at your data.
You know it's an object.
However, they encourage you to
write your own accessors,
and typically you'll use the
Xcode assistant to generate
code that looks like this.
Another example of what I think
is pretty awful to have to
contemplate boilerplate code.
Especially if you want to add more
properties and you have to deal
with merging the changes into a
source file you might already have.
So wouldn't it be great if we
didn't have to do any of this?
Well, in the version of Core Data that's
going to be shipping with Leopard GM,
you will just be able to
define a dynamic property,
and Core Data will write the rest.
Turns out, with this implementation,
Core Data can actually provide
you an accessor that runs at
least three times faster than that
boilerplate code I showed you.
The reason being,
Core Data can access all of its
private implementation details to
give you the most optimized accessor.
That's pretty cool.
So how does this work?
Well, it's built on a new feature,
a feature I invented
for dynamic properties,
but it turns out it's
a more general feature.
It's similar in spirit to forwarding.
What happens is the runtime system,
if it encounters a method, does a cache,
has a cache miss,
and it tries to find the
method in your class,
if it doesn't find it,
it'll introspect on your class and
see if you implement this new method,
resolve instance method.
There's also a resolve class
method for class methods.
It calls the method if it exists,
and if that method returns true,
it's telling the runtime.
It has, in fact,
added some kind of method
implementation to the method list,
and that it should now try to find it.
Now one of the interesting things
beyond properties you could use
this for would be to lazily map in,
let's say,
reflection to Python objects or
Ruby objects that you might be using
in embedded scripting language.
With this,
you don't have to eagerly reflect
everything into Objective-C as methods.
You can simply do it as they're used.
There are a lot of other things that
Core Data is going to also be showing
in their demo in terms of other kinds
of key value coding implementations
that this can be used for.
So lazy and dynamic,
that's pretty powerful.
So again, to summarize,
properties are built on
top of accessor methods.
They provide really good
support for encapsulation.
So if you decide to change how a
property is implemented down the road,
you can, and clients are none the wiser.
As a notational convenience,
you can override property methods.
You could override an individual accessor
method if you like in a subclass.
If you're thinking properties,
then you can use super.a as a
notational way to get at the
superclass's implementation.
You can also use the name of a
property unqualified in your methods,
and that's just sugar for
calling the accessor method.
You can also say self.a if
you like to be more explicit.
Finally, we made a conscious choice to
implement chained or cascaded
assignment with properties,
so that if you do this
x.a equals x.b equals c,
the c is evaluated only once,
and then it's more or
less parallel assignment.
We've seen other
property implementations,
for example,
ActionScript in another program,
Flash I guess it is,
implements it in a different way.
And it's very confusing to programmers
because the value would get changed and
it wouldn't work the way you'd expect.
So clients, well,
if you've been to any of
the core animation talks,
you've seen properties.
There they were.
Stole my thunder.
I was really excited to see that stuff.
So I think the great thing you're
going to find about them is that
you can go find the properties.
You can go find what these classes do.
You don't have to rely on
your documentation anymore.
You can discover the stuff.
That's, to me, pretty nice.
ImageKit as well is using them.
And we're promised that by Leopard GM,
Cocoa is going to be adopting
properties very wholeheartedly.
So go to the Core Data talk
later on today if you can,
or the Garbage Collection talk.
I think they're at the same time.
And now I'd like to
hand off to Greg Parker,
who's going to tell you about
64-bit Objective-C runtime.
Thank you, Patrick.
We have a new runtime in 64-bit.
We have a few reasons for doing this.
We want to provide with
a more extensible API.
In particular, the existing runtime API.
If any of you have gone and looked
at the Objective-C header files,
there are structures.
There's a class structure.
There's a method structure.
The structures we have are the
same structures that we have to
use internally because people
go to see the IVAR structure,
and they try and change the value,
or they go to the method structure and
try and change the method implementation.
We don't want that anymore.
So 64-bit, we're providing you API to do
most of the things you're doing,
most of the little tricks
and hacks you've been doing,
without needing the structures,
which means we can change the structures.
When we change the structures,
we can give you a few things.
Better performance is a big one.
We give you better memory performance.
The class structure in particular
needs to be initialized to
start up time for all classes,
whether you use them or not.
This takes memory.
This takes startup time.
So, without a new class,
with a hidden class structure,
we can give you lazy class setup,
better memory performance,
better startup time,
which means TextEdit, for example,
doesn't need to initialize
2,000 Cocoa classes that it
doesn't use as startup time.
Another better performance
we're going to give you:
better dispatch, object-C message send.
We can do it better.
You'll like it.
Finally, in 64-bit,
we can give you even more new
features that would have broken
the 64-bit compatibility.
In 32-bit,
we give you the API for the functions,
but we still have to provide
object-C class because all the
existing programs still call it.
64-bit, we can take it away,
which means we can give
you some neat features,
and we're going to talk
about them in a minute.
So, the new API, new functions in the
Objective-C runtime header files.
Most of you will never care.
Cocoa is a great
object-oriented framework.
For those of you who do care,
you're writing a language bridge,
you're doing some weird little hacks,
you're calling class poseAs, for example.
We have a new API for you.
Functional replacements for structs.
This is for obc class, obc, ivr,
all the structures.
We have covers that do most of the
work of accessing the structures and
changing the structures where reasonable.
Easier introspection of classes,
protocols,
in addition to properties that we've
shown you today and some other things.
We'll give you functional APIs.
You won't have to go groveling
through the header structures anymore
to look at what an IVAR list looks
like or what a method list looks
like because we keep changing it,
that sort of thing.
Finally, simpler class construction.
For the very few of you who are offering
new classes dynamically at runtime,
it is a very difficult thing to do today.
You have to allocate the structure,
initialize the structure exactly
the way the runtime wants.
If you put a null pointer or the runtime
wanted a pointer to a null pointer,
it just crashes.
We don't like that.
We're giving you a better
class construction API.
Again, functional,
no structures involved.
So these new functions are
available now on your Leopard
Seed in 32-bit and 64-bit.
Again, all the 32-bit old API is
still there in 32-bit.
All the class structures,
a couple functions we've taken away.
64-bit,
the structures are currently still there,
but not for long.
You'll see in a minute.
There's documentation on the WDC website
talking about these new functions,
describing what they do.
So see that for more details.
Here's a quick example of a couple.
Again, see the documentation.
There are a few dozen like this.
The first one, class gets superclass.
This is a basic cover replacing
the object-C class structure,
which had a superclass field in it.
Call the function instead.
You'll be happier.
We'll be happier, too.
Here's a quick example of a couple.
Again, see the documentation.
There are a few dozen like this.
The first one, class gets superclass.
This is a basic cover replacing
the object-C class structure,
which had a superclass field in it.
So instead, we have this function,
which will allocate an array for you,
give you the count.
The IVARs are now, of course,
opaque pointers that you have
functional access to as well.
Finally, cost-get-property,
copy-property list.
Of course,
looking at the new properties we've just
given you and the introspection of the
features that Patrick was talking about.
Here's a brief example of
the class construction API.
obc allocate class pair will allocate
a class and its metaclass for you.
Again, you don't have to know what
the class structure looks like.
Once you have that result,
you call a few functions like class
add Ivar to add an Ivar to the class.
There's also class add method function,
add methods as a class,
similar things like that.
When you're done constructing the class,
you call register class pair.
It tells the runtime, first of all,
you're done building it.
Second of all,
it should now be ready for use.
Objects can now be
allocated of that class.
Much simpler than it was before.
We can take down the old sample code
that Arriba needed to copy and paste
in order to get it to work before.
Second of all,
it should now be ready for use.
Objects can now be
allocated of that class.
Much simpler than it was before.
We can take down the old sample code
that Airbay needed to copy and paste
in order to get it to work before.
So all the existing class structures,
obc class, obc method, the method list,
the symbol table that
nobody's ever heard of,
these are all deprecated.
Selectors.
Cell currently is a car star.
It happens to be a unique car star,
but it's just a car star.
So a lot of people will cast it to a car
star in order to do things like print
it or stir comp or things like that.
In the future, it will not necessarily
be a car star at runtime.
So don't cast your cells to car star.
Instead, call the cell getName function,
which returns a perfectly
good car star already.
And that will remain,
that will continue to work when
cells are not car stars anymore.
Here's a big one for
you hackers out there:
Pose as Class is now deprecated.
So there are complicated
reasons for this.
POSAS class is primarily poorly defined,
unsupportable, unthreadsave, et cetera,
ad infinitum.
We are giving you functions in the new
functional API that will do most of the
things you used to do with PoseAs class.
If you want to replace a method that's
still called the old implementation,
you can still do that.
You want to add a method to a class,
you can use a category instead
of a posing class to do that.
So most of the functionality
is still there,
you just can't do class pose as itself.
You want to add a method to a class,
you can use a category instead
of a posing class to do that.
So most of the functionality
is still there,
you just can't do class pose as itself.
You want to add a method to a class,
you can use a category instead
of a posing class to do that.
So most of the functionality
is still there,
you just can't do class pose as itself.
and your leopard seed,
they are not deleted.
They're still there.
They still work.
If you want to get the
deprecation warnings,
you need to set your deployment
target on the command line or in
Xcode or wherever else to 10.5,
and then you'll get standard
compiler deprecation warnings
for all the functions,
all the structures, maybe even at-defs.
So, why are we taking away API?
So we can give you new ABI.
Why are we giving you new ABI?
So we can give you new features.
New ABI is not available yet.
The current ABI is still the
32-bit one in the 64-bit world.
In Leopard GM,
we will have the new ABI in place.
The features we will give you at
Leopard GM with this new ABI include
non-fragile instance variables,
zero-cost exceptions,
and faster messaging dispatch.
So, let's look at those.
In Leopard GM,
we will have the new ABI in place.
The features we will give you at
Leopard GM with this new ABI include
non-fragile instance variables,
zero-cost exceptions,
and faster messaging dispatch.
So, let's look at those.
It's got two IVARs in it,
plus NSObjects IVAR,
title and a content view.
On the right,
we have a subclass of NSWindow,
your subclass of NSWindow, my window.
So you're riding a pet
store or something,
I guess, because you have a kitten's
array and a puppy's array,
which are I-bars.
So here's the problem.
Leopard ships,
and they've added a new IVAR to NSWindow.
Call it Toolbar.
You want a standard toolbar
API or something like that.
So here's the problem.
Leopard ships,
and they've added a new IVAR to NSWindow.
Call it Toolbar.
You want a standard toolbar
API or something like that.
So we don't like this.
So today, AppKit,
the rest of the Cocoa stack,
any time they create a class,
they may not add IVARs later like this,
because any of your
subclasses don't work anymore.
This is fragile instance variables.
In C++, it's commonly called
fragile base class problem.
C++ has it with IVARs and with methods,
which makes it even worse.
We at least have methods that work.
So we're going to fix this in 64-bit,
non-fragile instance variables.
How this works is the runtime is
going to compute the offset at
runtime based on the size of the
superclass it sees at runtime.
So your generated code is no longer
having-- let's go back here--
when we look at the kittens array,
it's no longer a fixed offset, 12, or 24,
because it's 64-bit.
Instead,
that 12 will be looked up at runtime.
And the Objective-C runtime is free to
change it if it sees that NSWindow is in
fact bigger than it was when you compile.
So what does this mean?
It means that AppKit, Cocoa,
everybody else can add instance
variables without breaking your code,
without requiring you
to recompile your code.
You can reorder the instance variables.
You know, the offset is just a different
offset inside the class.
Deleting private IVRs also works.
You still can't delete a public
IVR because that's public API,
really, once it ships.
So, yeah, don't use public IVRs.
Private IVRs, you can delete them.
You don't have to worry about
the gap that is now in your class
that previously you'd have to fill
with some sort of placeholder.
The performance cost is rather small.
It just needs to read an extra
offset from a global variable
telling it where the IVAR now lives.
So this is the reason
why @def doesn't work.
Because when you call @def,
it creates a compile-time structure
that tries to look like the class
as well as its superclasses.
Of course,
the superclass now may look different,
which means the @def
structure will be out of date.
It just doesn't work anymore,
so we're taking it away.
Hopefully none of you care.
Finally, offset of an IVAR and size of
a class also no longer make
any sense because these are no
longer compile time constants.
You can use the runtime's functional
API to get the offset of an IVAR.
There's a class IVAR offset.
There's a class get instance size.
You want to know the
size of a class object.
So you can use those instead
of offset of and size of.
So again, this is 64-bit Leopard GM only.
The Leopard seed you have now is still
using fragile instance variables,
but they probably won't change
apt-get between the seed and GM,
at least not without you recompiling.
So it'll be fine.
Next feature, zero-cost exceptions.
This is primarily for
those of you Objective-C++
programmers in the audience.
So observation.
Cocoa rarely throws exceptions.
Most Cocoa exceptions
are programmer error,
out-of-array index access,
things like that.
Or method not found is another example.
Currently,
the implementation of exceptions in
Cocoa is using set jump and long jump,
which are slow when
you enter a try block.
You need to do some work
when you start the try block,
whether or not you end
up throwing anything.
So instead, for the 64-bit API,
we're going to reuse the
C++ infrastructure and their
online info for exceptions.
What this means is a try block costs you
nothing at runtime when you enter it.
There's no set jump.
There's no other data setup.
Throwing is a little bit more
expensive because you need to do all
the work that you would have done at
the try block in order to find out
where your data went when unwinding.
But we just noted that
Cocoa doesn't throw very much,
so that's OK.
Nobody minds.
The big benefit for this-- again,
Objective-C++ programmers out there--
your C++ exception handling and your
Cocoa exception handling are now unified.
You can throw-- Thank you.
You can throw a Cocoa exception
and catch it in a catch-ID block
or catch-dot-dot-dot block in C++.
Conversely,
you can throw a C++ exception and catch
it in an Objective-C catch-dot-dot-dot
equivalent block,
or an Objective-C finally
block if you have those.
The finally block will be invoked
instead of being just skipped
completely like it is today.
Which is sometimes wrong.
Finally, Faster Dispatch.
You're going to like this.
This is a sharp sample of Keynote showing
the Objective-C message send overhead
for the dynamic message dispatch.
Dynamic message dispatch is great.
It's powerful.
You get key-value coding.
You get forwarding.
You get all this neat
stuff that Cocoa uses.
On the other hand,
it does cost a bit of runtime.
In this Keynote example,
15.2% of the CPU time is in message send,
messaging lookup.
It's not bad, but it's not great.
We can do better than this.
Here's another example that we'll use
for taking advantage when we optimize it.
This is looking at the polymorphic
messages that mail sends,
the messages that have more than
one implementation somewhere.
If we look at the list, the top methods,
there are about 10 of them,
are taking 72% of the dispatch time.
So three-quarters of the time
in OBSI message send is sent
doing only a dozen methods or so.
Looking back at the "for each" example,
you'll note object index is the top
consumer in mail messaging time.
Looking at garbage collection,
you'll also see retain and
release are also top clients.
So use that "for each" statement,
the "for in" statement,
use garbage collection,
you can take away that overhead.
But for the rest of the overhead,
we want to be able to optimize this time.
So what we are adding is a
hybrid virtual table dispatch.
If any of you are familiar
with C++ internals,
you'll know what a virtual
table is for doing dispatch.
Objective-C message
send uses a hash table.
Looks up your selector using a
hash function in the method table.
A virtual table is basically
an array of function pointers
that you look up by index.
So array access, hash table access.
The array is a little bit faster.
In C++,
this is a problem because they have
the fragile base class problem.
You can't change the Vtable.
In Objective-C,
we have a dynamic runtime.
The dynamic runtime will generate
the Vtable for you and will change
the Vtable if the classes change.
The other problem that C++ has
is they use the virtual table
for all methods in all classes.
This turns out to be a lot of memory.
You have an array of function
pointers for every class that covers
all the methods that class has,
all the methods that superclasses have.
This is a lot more memory
than the Objective-C system,
which is only caching a few methods
that you've actually called.
So we noted with the mail example that
there were only a few methods that
were actually the really hot ones,
the ones that are called a lot,
the ones we want to optimize.
So what we will do with the
hybrid virtual tables is we will
only use the V table for the
very frequently called methods.
These methods are,
they're very frequently called,
and they tend not to be very polymorphic.
There aren't that many implementations
of object-at-index out there.
So what this means is the
virtual tables are small.
There's only maybe a
dozen methods in them,
usually.
And the virtual table is generally
the same for different classes,
because your class
didn't override release.
It didn't override object-at-index,
which means you can use
your superclass's Vtable.
So the Vtables get reused
across many classes,
which means that the memory
cost is still very low.
For all the rest of your methods,
the methods that aren't called as often,
we still use the normal
hash table lookup.
So we don't get the speed gain,
but those methods aren't called as often,
so the speed gain is just not there.
So the Vtable dispatch is at least 50%
faster than the object-C message sent.
for those functions that
you're actually calling.
It is not quite as fast as C++
virtual tables because we want to
avoid the fragile base class problem.
So ours is a bit more dynamic.
The virtual table size and
contents are adjustable per app.
So if your application has
particular methods that it is calling
frequently that you want to optimize,
you stick those in a
list in an Xcode window,
and the virtual table will be
constructed at runtime using
your methods that you call.
which means that you get the performance
gain for the methods you write instead
of just the standard foundation
object and index and similar methods.
So that is it for what we're going
to say about the Objective-C runtime.
And now back to Blaine
Garst for some final words.
[Transcript missing]
All the features we talked about
require changes to the runtime.
And so, unfortunately,
you're not going to be able to
use these constructs if you're
going to try to ship back on Tiger.
There's just no way we could
figure out how to make that happen.
So,
this is a Leopard-only set of features.
And the only consolation prize here,
though, is that the headers that you use,
even as we adopt these
optional methods and protocols,
as we put properties and stuff
into the header files and stuff,
you can still compile against 10.5
and ship against 10.4 or 10.3.
So, you can look at them,
but you can't use them until you
compile and build for Leopard-only.
And so, with that, we have, again,
a session on garbage collection.
Stay in your seats if you
want to hear more about that.
We have a language lesson.
We have a language lab tomorrow night.
I will be -- there will be members
of the team in the language lab
probably most of the day tomorrow,
in fact.
So,
come on down if you want to hear about
what's going on and check it out.
And, of course,
documentation is still very useful.
And we've got some great
documentation on all of this stuff.
Some of it may only be
downloadable right now.
And there are still some
things yet to be documented.